Nouns :
	Kashmir
	Narendra Modi
	BJP
	Vajpayee
	Syama Prasad Mookerjee
	India
	Pakistan
	Prime Minister
	Hindu
	Muslim
	Kashmiri Pandits

Summary :
	This article details what Narendra Modi can achieve in Kashmir. Modi is seeking to highlight efforts made to bring unity among India and Kashmir. He is also trying to get attention towards secessions and minority people in Kashmir.

	Albeit achieving an overwhelming victory in 2014 elections and trying to influencing neighbouring nations, Modi should focus and influence Kashmir, the internal constituent. 

	BJP has its roots with Kashmir since its founder Syama Prasad Mookerjee's arrest and death following arrest for crossing reserved Kashmir. His is a controversial issue, having claims to be a Nehrus conspiracy, while the martyrs mother pleaded to Nehru for detailed enquiry which is rejected with assuaging reasons.

	During 1990's, Vajpayee, Murali Manohar Joshi, Narendra Modi and many other played vital role in BJP's relationship with Kashmir. Albeit Vajpayee government embarked several talks with Pakistan, everything ended up in a vain due to violence.

	Vajpayee government created war zone, a competition to existing separatist's which failed itself. Modi should bring up peace at first place. Soldiers should be given better care in every aspect.

	Modi should create a mollified political culture in Kashmir, which is currently a desolated from Delhi, though they have realized that best future of Kashmir lies with India.

	Kashmir, which saw lot of human rights violations should be assured of a a harmonious environment, fast trails of past violences, providing the standard of living for returning dignified pandits and so,

	People can be inspired and placated by erecting martyrs status in important places in Kashmir.

My View :
	Albeit Modi emerged with tremendous victory in the 2014 elections, garnering a strong majority, before trying to influence adjacent countries, he should concentrate on internal state Kashmir and restore peace and harmony, which ia a arduous task to achieve.

Title : 
	Modi-fication of Kashmir - Demands on The Prime Minister Modi